\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename pgmtovol.info
@set UPDATED July 18, 2006
@set UPDATED-MONTH July 2006
@set EDITION 0.1
@set VERSION 0.1
@settitle pgmtovol @value{VERSION}

@finalout
@copying
This manual was last updated @value{UPDATED} for version
@value{VERSION} of pgmtovol.

Copyright (C) 2006 Martin Lambers

@quotation
This program, including this manual,
is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program, including this manual,
is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* pgmtovol: (pgmtovol).		Convert a series of PGM images to volume data.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title pgmtovol
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Martin Lambers (@email{marlam@@marlam.de})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top pgmtovol
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@code{pgmtovol} reads a series of PGM images from standard input, converts 
them to volume data in the @code{.vol} format, and writes this data to
standard output.

This program has no options.

The @code{.vol} data format is specified at 
@url{http://www.cb.uu.se/~tc18/code_data_set/Code/Libvol/}.

@bye
