\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@afourpaper
@setfilename cvlview.info
@set UPDATED March 20, 2010
@set VERSION 1.0.0
@settitle CVLView @value{VERSION}

@c Define new index for commands
@defcodeindex cm

@finalout
@copying
This manual was last updated @value{UPDATED} for version
@value{VERSION} of CVLView.

Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 Martin Lambers

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* cvlview: (cvlview).	An image viewer based on the CVL library.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title CVLView
@subtitle An image viewer based on the CVL library.
@subtitle version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Martin Lambers (@email{marlam@@marlam.de})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top CVLView
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* About CVLView::
* Copying Information::
@end menu


@node About CVLView
@chapter About CVLView

CVLView is a viewer for arbritrary data that is stored in pfs files.
It is based on the CVL library.

The program’s homepage is @url{https://marlam.de/cvl}.


@node Copying Information
@appendix Copying Information

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::   License for copying this manual.
* GNU GPL::                          License for copying the program.
@end menu

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@unnumberedsec GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi
@node GNU GPL
@unnumberedsec GNU GPL
@include gpl.texi


@bye
